hi I'm Sasha Simona my big bed my big
bed JPL title is software systems
engineer but I go by Amer civillization
producer I'm also a project lead so I'm
gonna be kind of explaining what all of
that means and how I combined the idea
of studying art into a career in science
specifically at NASA specifically at the
Jet Propulsion Laboratory so we're gonna
go in a little bit of a journey through
me and then a little history lesson on
JPL and then I'll talk about some
immersive projects that I work on so how
do you combine art and science and quite
frankly this is how I felt a lot of my
life
I'm the shrug emoji that's actually
that's that's me
so growing up I always didn't know which
which which part well which box I fit in
so here's a picture of me when I was
little crushed velvet dress and playing
a computer game you have to dress up
when you play computer games when you're
me so I always tried to combine these
different things I'm a musician I made
art I also loved computers and
technology and I was always big in
science so for me kind of and I can't
get into it because this talk is so
short but I found kind of the media
world in college a place where I could
do both computer programming and still
make conceptual art and have them join
together so after living in Chicago in
New York and working at the Field Museum
and then in New York doing web design
and development I moved to California
and started working for NASA so I've
been there for four years if you don't
know this is called a meet the meatball
logo so if you learn something today you
can call it the meatball cuz it is the
other ones called the worm the one
that's red that's the worm so if you
don't know
wow how NASA functions we're basically
an agency that has ten centers scattered
all across the United States and I work
at this one here it is in all its glory
it's nestled within the San Gabriel
Mountains in Pasadena California and
it's actually the
NASA centers actually predates NASA it
started in 1936 and NASA became an
agency in 1958 so they were the crazy
people that started trying to mess
around with rockets and shoot things
into space and I'm gonna show you my
favorite image from that time and
explain why I work there guess which one
is the JPL er is that the hungover
looking one in the center not wearing a
shirt that would be the correct answer
so in the early years of JPL in the 30s
JPL was first sponsored by the US Army
to develop rocket technology for the
corporate and Sergeant missile systems
and this photo is of one of the tests
that they were doing for the missiles in
their Arroyo where my work is now so the
guys in military garb are obviously the
US Army and the guy in the center is
looking not at the same direction that
they're all looking at and that is
because the US military people are
looking at where the rocket is taking
off but the JPL er is looking at where
he thinks it will land so this in a
nutshell kind of is how I feel about
working where I work and one of my first
biggest love stories is with the Mars
Science Laboratory mission which is so
nicely called the Curiosity rover and
how many people are aware of this
mission ok so I don't need to go through
it if you don't know you should read up
on it I don't have time I could do a
full talk on curiosity alone but this
mission in a nutshell is amazing because
it was supposed to be a 90 day mission
and it's lasted for seven years now it's
coming on seven years this August so
that's quite a feat and a combination of
this wonderful Rover as well as the NASA
charter I know you guys are so exciting
the way so part of the NASA Charter says
that we have to use the widest
dissemination of or disseminate your
information to the widest amount of
people that we possibly can so my first
job at JPL was actually in
communications and I became fascinated
with how to do that the most creatively
so it was really telling the public
things
so that they would care not so they
would click so they would want to read
more maybe on their own but so that they
would be engaged and I kind of fell into
a lucky thing where this panorama was
getting put together in February of 2016
and this looks like a melty thing unless
you work an immersive media and then you
kind of know what it is it's a panoramic
image but we don't usually take images
of both the rover herself and the
surrounding the surrounding land around
her because it takes a lot of data data
passes the Deep Space Network that just
takes a lot of time so we were lucky and
I was lucky enough to kind of know that
YouTube was coming out with an API for
360 video to be already inherently
imbued in the program so I took a bunch
of time and smashed our panoramas into
their API and made the first 360 for
NASA so the agency had never publicly
released something like this and the
public engagement was incredible like
they could see where curiosity was how
tall the dune was and they could also
kind of ask questions about immersive
media in general like do I spend my
phone around what am i doing so we were
kind of for the first time kind of
working at the rate of technology
because it was something that was
already publicly available to everyone
and it was super amazing to be part of
this and I became a little bit obsessed
so I started making 360s in producing
them with scientists and engineers that
not a J PL specifically and kind of
stopped doing anything else one more
highlight I'll show you is for the Juno
mission to Jupiter we had the orbital
insertion into Jupiter's atmosphere on
July 4th 2016
NASA loves those American holidays you
know we've got to do it on I don't know
how they always plan it it's like how
they're smart orbital trajectories
people are insane so Jupiter as you know
is like the Mordor of planets it's super
scary maybe you don't know but if Mordor
was a planet it would be Jupiter so this
was a huge feat and we wanted to I was
like okay so let's see what the visuals
would be like using actual data that we
have now from the Galileo mission of
what Jupiter looks like and put people
next to Juno flying into the orbit
but that wasn't all we also went inside
the spacecraft in a 3d CAD model and
inside the spacecraft you can see
there's three little figures on the
bottom there these are gifts I'm sorry
but it's too hard to pan around a pin
around a 360 while talking so those are
three little LEGO Minifigures that were
actually flying along with Juno so it
wasn't just a robotic mission it did
have passengers and it even gets cuter
the LEGO Minifigures our Galileo Juno
and Jupiter so really doing a little not
of the hat to the history of of Jupiter
and the history of Greek mythology
really so this was a really good way to
kind of engage the public get them very
stoked and if you are a content creator
or if you're a teacher if you go to this
link you will find all the 360s that all
of the agencies have made for NASA and
be able to download them I warn you the
website is not beautiful so forgive me
but it takes you to the right links and
it also takes you to the YouTube channel
for JPL where we have a whole playlist
of cool 360s so as I said I became
obsessed with three sixties but that
wasn't enough I wanted to get into the
backend it didn't like working with API
is that it couldn't control I wanted to
work with unity I wanted to be like
helping 3d developers figure things out
so naturally I moved to this place at
JPL called the ops lab which is kind of
like a start-up within JPL or a bunch of
developers and designers kind of trying
to figure things out from research and
development to flight projects so
actually working with missions and our
goal is to try to change scientists and
engineers in their workflow and make it
easier and make it easier to visualize
what they're actually doing before they
do it or while they're doing it so we
kind of function in this world of user
centered design software development and
business development strategy so we do a
lot of partnerships and collaborations
with bigger industry because we are
quite tiny I mean not quite tiny we're
45 people but every project has about
eight people so you know we're tight and
we work on projects like these and I'll
go through a couple of them with you now
a lot of work with the hololens a lot of
augmented reality and a lot of web
partnership
inside that so we figured out that they
are alone isn't a good enough thing to
work especially with scientists and
engineers that are working on laptops
that are from 1992 so you have to have a
web component like does this work on an
heiko don't say a browser that doesn't
exist anymore please so the first
project I'll be talking about is on site
and this is actually the first
application developed for the microsoft
hololens so this is a collaboration with
them this is an anaglyph this is how
scientists and planetary geologist
studying the surface of Mars used to
look at data to get 3d perspective on it
I mean it's cool you put the glasses on
you get some depth but it wasn't enough
so we started doing some user research
in 2013 basically trying to prove that
if you take photogrametry of Mars really
crudely put it in the first oculus put
scientists in it we wanted them to just
be like oh this is better and that's
exactly what happened and then enter
hololens we started working with the
Microsoft team to create automatic kind
of visualization of Mars so through the
pipeline that we created we actually
have our scientists and engineers
virtually walking on Mars together as
they would on earth and exploring the
latest Sol or Martian day that the
Curiosity rover is on so we're using
unity to build this up and the best
thing about it is that it is
collaborative so you see these little I
didn't design the avatar Microsoft did
but you see these avatars so if you're
not in the same location as someone else
you can actually go and kind of
virtually meet up on a planet so we're
truly enabling scientists to work on
Mars from their offices and I'll show
you a little a little video of the
reconstruction that we do so the really
the magic or the wonderful thing
shouldn't say magic that in technology
never mixed too well but the wonderful
thing about this is that we did create
an automatic pipeline so as data passes
through the deep space network
oh no it's not loading oh there goes uh
so this is actual Mars you guys and it's
it's an integrated mesh which means that
we do
make some guesses on some of the
polygons we also have a baseline mesh
which is actually just the raw data from
the rover it looks black and white it's
not this pretty but it's better for
science so this data gets pulled down
automatically put into our program and
onto a hollow one so if I had one today
and I was like hey where's curiosity put
on the hololens and look at the data
that we have and that's the first time
we really visualize things in that way
also touting our wonderful work there
was this dong dong dong desiccation
cracks or mud crackers found on Mars
doesn't sound fun does it but it is
because it's another reason that we
found idea the idea that there was
ancient life on Mars because of this
ancient water so these cracks were first
seen in on sight and that was a huge
feat for us because it actually
connected us to an actually scientific
discovery and a real paper and it
validated visualization in this way as a
real scientific kind of helper and
although that doesn't sound a bat like a
battle that's hard to fight I think for
an agency like NASA you do have to have
these papers published and it was a
really it was a really exciting time for
us and these are some visuals of our
meet on Mars sessions so there are the
avatars again but these are scientists
in Europe and in all over the planet
basically all meeting up where curiosity
is and doing real science
they also kneel so when you kneel down
they actually kneel people love it I
don't know why they love that feature so
much but it's like I don't know it's
great though and if you're interested in
exploring Mars we actually collaborated
with Google on a product called access
Mars which basically lets you do the
same thing except from a modern browser
so if you go to access Mars com you can
check it out I think it's actually under
construction so you can only do it on a
desktop but that's not my fault that is
Google's fault they're updated if
they're uploading it to web X are so I'm
waiting on that I don't have much time I
have some kind of gonna breeze through
this so hold on to your hats so that was
a science part of things the project
that I lead is the 3d CAD visualization
imagery project so what that means is
taking really complex CAD imagery and
I'm not going to show this video because
I don't think we have well maybe a
little bit let's see
basically we take cat
engineering models and visuals that
visualize them in full scale in the room
so another collaborative project that
you can look at with another person but
you know we solve the problems of being
like will my hand fit here when I'm
trying to put this thing together in
real life or will this tool fit with
this actual part so these kind of scale
and integration and testing problems
that are really hard to catch in a 2d
realm specifically in a CAD file or in a
PowerPoint presentation which is truly
how people were doing this before we're
visualizing spacecraft that haven't been
built yet in 3d so we're able to solve
problems quite literally before they
happen it's changed the way that a lot
of missions are designed we're working
really closely with the Europa clipper
mission we're actually featured in the
documentary on that geo about them as
the first thing like look at this new
technology so using the hololens and a
web client we're basically able to
disseminate a model to a way that it
will render on Holland and view it and
work on it together so I know that our
come other companies are doing this as
well but from a small scale we're doing
it that is we're doing it in a way that
is very specific to an engineer's flow
you know that was a real reaction by the
way Alice had never done that before and
she was like what just happened it
scaled so we're really trying to cater
this to JPL errs and NASA agencies but
we're also trying to have a better
workflow with outside vendors and other
companies as well so it's a really
exciting project and this one I'm just
gonna breeze through these this also
touches human spaceflight so we worked
with Scott Kelly we shot a couple holo
lenses into space and worked on remote
assist and a procedure with him so
basically taking Holograms putting them
over actual hardware and taking a
step-by-step walkthrough on how to do
something so instead of reading a piece
of paper on how to do it you're actually
doing it virtually in stitch you so
we're empowering the crew with
assistants when where they need it and
we just did a really exciting real test
I won't have time to go through this but
we did a really awesome real test at the
Aquarius habitat which is off Key Largo
and floor
it's the only aquatic habitat in the
world and we had a crew - scientist -
astronauts or aquanauts come on it's
real it's a real word and to HAP Tex
actually doing a 10-day mission
underneath the water doing a moon out
analogue test and they use proto space
to do a procedure so this was another
huge one where we had actual people
using these tools in real life
pretending that they were on the moon
but doing them in real life so is pretty
exciting stuff and I can talk your ear
off about this and again we poured
everything to the public so if you're
interested in kind of seeing this
workflow you can download spacecraft AR
which is an AR app where you can see a
lot of our flying missions and see them
in full scale just from the comfort of
your living room and you can do
collaborative sessions as well it's a
really cool party trick or if you have
kids it's a great way to make them do
their homework I do tutoring so I'm like
I bet you you don't you if you do this
I'll show you three spacecraft they're
all in my pocket and they're like
whatever man and I'm like no I'm serious
and then it's like minds blown oh they
love it so great party trick if you
don't know what to talk about just show
people robotic spacecraft so to end I
just want to say kind of for me what I
figured out in this kind of jam-packed
speechless cave is the International
interact intersectionality of art and
Sciences the ability to work in the
design process with both flight missions
and transform the way scientists and
engineers do their job but also inspire
other humans that are going to be into
the scientific content even more because
it's going to inspire them and what I'm
trying to do is truly bridge the gap
between what happened in history and
putting a new and more realistic look on
how science engineering and art can be
combined today by so many interesting
people to do more things in the world
that are bigger than us
and that's proven in a lot of these
little letters that I get from the kids
I talk to just them mentioning the idea
that art and science can exist in one
place it's something that I wish I had
when I was little and I'm so glad to be
the person that is trying to say this
and
I think in this room we're all trying to
say the same thing but you know it's not
until you see them react that you kind
of say oh my god they used the words
together and it makes sense
one of the kids wrote me a letter and he
said I wanted to be a baseball player
and a cop and you inspired me to be a
baseball cop and I was like okay yes I
really want to follow this guy's career
it's gonna be amazing I was like but how
baseball cop how so if you want to get
in touch I am all over the Internet and
please feel free to reach out I like a
zero inbox and I always read all my DMS
maybe I'm a CD about it but please reach
out and ask questions and there's that
website again if you want to download
360s and our youtubes that we had have
for public consumption from JPL and with
that I want to say thank you again to
the gray area festival and all the
people that are putting to this together
it's been a wonderful experience so far
and I'm so pleased to be able to speak
to you thank you
[Applause]